Good afternoon.
How's the show going for you all?
Good?
Looks like we got another very
pretty good crowd here today.
My name is Barry Janzen,
Barry Toolman Janzen,
and welcome to Tool Time.
We're going to go over the
WebObjects Tools today.
Before I do that, though,
I've got some good
news and some bad news.
The bad news is that I don't
talk as fast as Ernie Probecker,
and I'm not as funny,
nor do I demo as quick as Steve Heyman.
That's the bad news.
The good news is that Ernie told me
that we could give away a titanium
laptop with WebObjects on it,
and the way we're going
to give it away is,
this is all the standard disclaimers,
please invoke all the
standard disclaimers,
this is a joke.
Okay, but what we're going to do is
we're going to count to three,
and when I say three,
the first one to stand up
is going to get the laptop.
Okay?
So here we go, everybody seated please.
One, two, three.
Okay, now that I've got your attention,
let's talk about tools.
The trickiest part of this presentation
is going to be trying to get through
it without using this number.
Otherwise it's going to cost me.
So we're going to talk about
WebObjects Tools today.
- If I can, there we go.
So here's what you're gonna learn.
We're gonna go over
This session is an introduction to tools.
There are many other sessions that
go into tools in greater depth,
but we're going to go over the tools
that WebObjects developers will use
in building a typical application.
We'll build a very basic application.
More specifically,
we're going to build an application that
uses Direct to Web as a starting point.
Along the way, we'll expose all the tools
that are typically in the
WebObjects developers' arsenal,
and we'll also expose some of the
things that are new in WebObjects 5.
A little bit of Project Builder in that,
so for some of you,
I know that will be quite new.
So what are the tools?
If you go online and you read
WebObjects Tools and Techniques,
you'll see that there are three...
Oh!
I made it five minutes, okay.
You'll see that there's this trilogy,
there's this trilogy of
tools in Project Builder,
EOModeler, and WebObjects Builder.
Okay?
If you go somewhere else on the web,
if you look in Ernie's,
in Ernie's presentation,
if you look at tools and techniques,
it actually adds direct-to-web in there,
and doesn't talk as much
about Project Builder.
Okay?
So what are the tools?
We always kind of refer to those three,
but there's two others we'd like
to talk to you about today as well,
and that's direct-to-web assistant,
and direct-to-Java client assistant.
Okay?
And those are tools that allow us to
rapidly build these direct-to-web and
direct-to-Java client applications.
In direct-to-web,
it's a Java applet that connects up to
your running application and modifies it.
In direct-to-Java client,
it's a swing UI interface with a
connection to modify your application.
It's a very simple way to modify
your swing UI applications
that are based on web objects.
So we'll talk about five today.
First of all, the tasks,
I'll go over the tasks that
we're going to go through.
So if you're a new developer,
this is really targeted at you.
But what we want to do is
start from easiest to hardest.
A lot of times we come out here,
as systems engineers,
when we go out and do
demonstrations on WebObjects,
it's a tremendously powerful and
flexible set of frameworks and
powerful tools that go with it.
And a lot of times we go very broad and
very wide and very deep very quickly,
and we lose a lot of people.
So we're going to kind of go
through a process here that
isn't too hard to get started.
I mean, if you're not a rich,
experienced WebObjects developer that's
been doing this for years and years,
you should feel at home
during this presentation.
If you are an experienced
WebObjects developer,
and perhaps you haven't... seen
some of these other technologies,
or used these other
technologies extensively,
my guess is you know a manager,
or you know somebody you work with,
who asks you about WebObjects,
and you get the idea that maybe
they're not going to drill to the
depths of insert objects into both
sides of relationships with key,
and so they need something a
little easier to get started with.
Once they're started,
you can help them out.
Right?
you can call Apple I services
and we'll help you out.
So there's lots of places to get help
once you get started on web objects,
but the trick is to get you started.
So that's what our goal is
with those technologies.
Okay?
Okay, so the tasks are Project Builder,
we're going to start a new project,
we'll look at what is
involved in the project,
where do things go,
how do we handle them,
we'll compile a project,
Project Builder does this for you,
we'll set some runtime parameters,
show you where that is,
it's a little different than
the new Project Builder,
and then we'll launch the application.
Direct to Web will launch
the Direct to Web Assistant,
will customize both tasks and entities
with the Direct to Web Assistant,
and then we'll save and
make changes on the fly.
If some of you saw
Scott Forstall in the keynote,
you saw one of the hallmarks to
our way of developing technology,
and that is when you
have live object systems,
you can do some pretty cool
things dynamically on the fly,
and that's what we're
going to try and do today.
WebObjects Builder,
we're going to take some standard
components that come in our
application and we're going
to modify those a little bit.
Steve Hayman yesterday in session 601
went over this quite a bit yesterday,
so we won't go into it quite as much as
he did in their other sessions as well.
[Transcript missing]
And lastly, Direct to Java Client.
There are other sessions on this as well,
so what we're going to do is
simply launch an application,
show you where the Direct to
Java Client Assistant is,
and just do some browsing of
some information that we'll use
earlier on in the presentation.
We'll also put this slide at the end
with some of the key other sessions,
but we think you should know
this now because other sessions
will talk about some of these
things and overlap a little bit.
And if you want to find out,
if you find something in this
presentation that you really like,
you may want to come to one
of these following sessions.
So Project Builder,
there are a number of sessions
going on with Project Builder.
I believe the first
one's already completed,
but there will be a couple
of other ones on debugging.
There will be a session on
Direct to Web with Miguel here.
WebObjects Builder will be covered
again a little bit in getting
the most out of WebObjects Tools.
EOModelers will be touched upon
at a couple of other sessions
because it works with EOF.
So the sessions on EOF will
be covering that as well.
And Direct to Java Client,
as I mentioned,
there's a Direct to Java Client session
and an Advanced Java Client session.
So mark those down as we go through this
and we'll try and give you the sample
platter here of the WebObjects Tools.
Okay.
So let's build a common web app.
A common question I get when
I meet with customers is,
"Is WebObjects hard to use?"
And I used to say, well,
there is a steep learning curve, and yes,
you know,
and I'd say what Steve's saying,
and so you learn a lot in
a short amount of time,
and you know, blah, blah, blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah.
Now I stop and ask them before
I jump into that and say,
well, it depends.
What problem are you trying to solve?
And when customers start explaining what
kind of problems they're trying to solve,
it all depends on, you know.
And a typical thing they're doing
is they're looking at a database.
and they're creating, reading, updating,
deleting the standard kinds of things.
Not a lot of business logic,
a little bit of
customization in the HTML,
and that's about it.
So you look at them and say, well,
we have some frameworks and we
can probably do that with no code.
And they go, oh really?
Well, but it goes across this table and
it has a too many relationship,
and it goes across here on a many
to many and it does this and that,
and here's our whole schema
and see how hard it is?
And WebObjects has frameworks
in there to help you do that.
to help you build an application
that does all this without
having to write code to do it.
It's only when you solve the hard
and the difficult problems that you
really have to drill to the depths of
WebObjects to do these kinds of things.
So the following session, Intro to EOF,
we'll begin to talk
about that a little bit.
We'll go into greater depths of how do
you use EOF to solve these hard problems
that are out there in the industry.
But a lot of these
problems aren't that hard.
So we'll show you the get
started way on how to do that.
The other thing I want to point
out is if you don't know by now,
wizards are bad.
If you haven't heard that from
Steve Heyman earlier or if you
haven't heard that from somebody else,
when we think of wizards,
we think of code generators.
Wizards are okay to kind of get you
started and help you out a little bit.
And Project Builder has a little
one just to sort of ask you.
Ask you a few questions and just
kind of help you get started.
But if a wizard is going
to generate a lot of code,
that's typically a bad thing because
who ends up supporting that code?
Who's got to support all the
lines of code to this gen?
And the first thing you're going
to do is you're going to look
at that and you're going to go,
oh my gosh, who wrote this stuff?
And now I'm stuck here supporting it.
So, wizards in general are bad.
What is better is to use
pre-built frameworks.
and to hook those and wire those up.
So you'll see that metaphor
in Interface Builder.
You'll see that metaphor
in WebObjects Builder.
You'll see that metaphor in
a lot of places and things
we do of hooking them up.
We traditionally use things like plist.
Well,
now the in thing to say is obviously XML.
But that's how we hook these things up.
That's how we get started with these.
So rather than doing a wizard,
we're going to start a
direct to web application.
I think you'll see it's much
more flexible than a wizard.
Okay,
so getting started with Project Builder.
Project Builder is,
if you don't know by now,
Project Builder is the way to
develop WebObjects applications.
On Mac OS X with WebObjects 5,
it is a new Project Builder if you're
a traditional WebObjects Builder
and you've come along the way.
So there are some things in there you'll
need to be aware of that are a little
bit different and we'll show those.
Project Builder is our integrated
development environment.
It also manages,
other than just the standard edit,
compile, debug code,
it also manages resources for you.
So we're creating these model files
where we've modeled a database and
we've got to store that somewhere,
we've got to manage that somewhere.
So that's included as
a part of the product,
as a part of the project.
Same thing with WebObjects Builder.
It creates HTML and object
descriptions that bind to that.
It also manages those.
It handles web server resources.
It handles a number of other
resources that you have to deal
with in a typical web application.
It also handles launching your
applications and runtime parameters
when you launch those so that
you can test your applications.
Okay, so the first thing we'll
do in Project Builder,
we need to select the kind of
project we're going to build.
And as a new developer told me recently,
the beauty of getting started
with WebObjects is you launch
Project Builder and now you have
47,000 project types to choose from.
Which one?
Okay, so it is a little difficult to pick
the right one or to know the right one.
So we'll kind of help
you through that process,
let you kind of know how to get started.
But direct to web,
Think of Direct to Web as creating
a model file much in the same way
that we model a data dictionary or a
schema coming in from the database.
It's a little bit different.
It's more of a rules file, really.
But you can think of it as a
little bit of abstraction from
the objects in our application.
So EOModelers creates an
abstraction from the database.
It takes data rows and turns
them into objects that we
like to program in objects,
right?
and our model here will take
those objects and basically
describe how to present those.
So we've now isolated ourselves
both ways a little bit.
From the user interface,
which can change very quickly,
and from the database that
can change very quickly.
So Direct to Web will give us by
default a standard login page.
Nothing too exciting there.
The Web Assistant then connects up to
this application that we've launched,
and it'll allow us to
customize that on the fly.
So that's what we're going to do.
We'll launch the application,
and then we'll customize
it as we go along.
What do people use Direct to Web for?
Traditionally,
a few people have used it for doing
things like validating my model.
I have an object model from my database.
Can I get from my
customers to my suppliers?
Can I traverse relationships?
Can I traverse key value coding
through all this stuff to get through
all these relationships and make my
application work the way it should?
You can use it as a validation tool that,
yeah, this actually has all the
relationships that I need in my model.
It's also very useful for
creating administrative apps.
How many of you have developed an app
and you get done and somebody says,
well, we've got to have a way
for our secretaries to get
information into the system?
You don't want to sit there and do
a quick application or something.
You can just throw it into
Direct to Web and hand it over.
You can do it forever immediately.
Okay?
So that's another use.
But what we'd like to do is customize
it just a little bit more and begin to
show you how you can actually use this
as a real live running application,
not just for admin apps and not just
for pumping data into the application.
Again, WizardBed, remember that.
We're going to build a new project,
so this is what you'll do any time
you're building a WebObjects application.
Again,
here's the 47,000 choices that you have.
We will select a
Direct to Web application,
and we'll name this app "Our School."
These are the pre-built frameworks
that WebObjects includes.
If I've got other ones,
such as when Steve Heyman built
his demonstration yesterday,
wanted to add in a few other frameworks,
you can do this up front if you
know you're going to want to include
some pre-built code that either
your company's developed or maybe
Apple iServices has developed for you.
Let's add a model.
For right now, we're just going to kind
of pass the model off until
later in the presentation.
Just consider it some magic
somebody has handed you on how
to connect up to a database.
So we choose our model.
And now we have a couple
of looks in Direct to Web.
We'll choose the neutral look,
but we can change this in the
rules at any time if you want
to change the look and feel.
[Transcript missing]
WebServer Resources,
if we have WebServer Resources,
things that need to go with
the HTTP server and be copied
over there to be vended,
that's where they'll go.
And then the frameworks
that I just included,
again, if I want to include some
others after I've started up,
this is where I would put them.
Okay?
So that's our application.
Hammer means build,
so we're building the application.
If you want to take a look at
what is spewing out of here,
you'll notice that it's not make anymore.
It's now jam,
using jam to build the files.
And it's built.
The other thing that's kind of new,
if you're just walking
up to Project Builder and
you're like most guys,
I admit it,
that don't want to read the manual
or listen to your wife and pull into
a gas station to get directions,
you go to enough of these sessions,
we'll all give you one or two tips,
and you'll learn Project Builder here.
Executables, there we go,
that's much better, thank you.
Minus, whoa, port, port.
[Transcript missing]
You can also enter a number
of other things in there.
Like I said, we will need to build this
application right now.
When the build target is done,
we can launch it now.
And that should go a little better.
As I mentioned,
there are a number of parameters
you can set when you launch this,
and those all show up here.
So you can see where my port is set,
and these are all in red here,
the runtime parameters
that you can set here.
It used to be a separate panel,
so get used to that a little bit
of the moving panels as we go here.
Okay, our application is ready.
Okay.
Okay, so the default page in a Direct to
Web application is a query all.
And query all just says,
take all the entities that you
had in that database thing that
somebody handed you and pick
one thing and put it in there.
Take a good guess.
Okay?
So it takes a pretty good
guess on these things.
Course, course name,
where course name begins with B.
Okay, I can go out and search.
Boom, there's my courses and my
course database for my school.
Okay?
Anytime we hit home,
we go back to the main page.
Okay?
We can also begin to
customize this a little bit.
So if you're building your first app,
you're probably not
going to do the full...
Insert, Update, Delete,
all this kind of stuff with
multiple tables and a big thing.
If you got WebObjects out of the box,
how many of you got the book
out that said Getting Started?
So the Getting Started book is
probably how you got started,
right?
You did Guess Book,
and then you did a simple Movies Demo.
So when you do a Movies Demo
or get started that way,
usually you're only querying
on one or at most two entities.
And then we're traversing down a path.
So I don't want to make
this quite so complex.
But I'll show you as we go through this,
there's two ways actually of doing this.
I can launch it in the browser,
which is a simpler way.
And once the browser is getting
meshed up with the underlying
Java code that's in the MRJ,
they'll be able to deal
with this much better.
But for now...
We will walk this fine line as I walk
off the edge of the stage here.
So it's going to be a little tight here,
but let's see what happens.
Okay, that's good.
So the Query All page
is the default page.
It doesn't have a customization,
but I'm going to customize the entities.
As we said,
we can customize the entities and the
tasks that are involved in this app.
So picture your manager or your
coworker working on this and saying,
OK, well, I can make all those read only.
What's that-- that's going
to change a little bit.
Now I can also take course-- I probably
only want to look at for now--
let's pick courses and students.
And let's save that off.
OK.
Reload.
Boom.
OK.
So now I've only got two.
I've cut that down to two entities.
The others are hidden.
So there were three categories here.
If you can read the tiny font,
it's hidden entities, read-only entities,
and read-write.
OK.
So now I've got two.
That's a good start.
OK.
So let's look at students.
Let's look at students whose
last name begins with B.
Okay, so we've got a number of them.
I don't like first name
in front of last name,
so again, I can go into the Assistant.
And now I'm going to go into Expert mode.
Okay, so if I look at the
properties of this page,
I've got first name and
I've got last name in here.
And I can customize that to some
extent by selecting last name.
Moving it up a notch,
so that'll come first.
But you'll notice,
if you were at yesterday's session,
Steve talked a little,
Steve Heyman talked a little bit about
key value coding and going across
relationships that come from our model,
that students have a 2-1
relationship to photo.
So I can select photo.photo and
move this into my application,
or move this into my page.
And notice Direct to Web is
smart enough to figure out
the attributes that are there.
I can save this.
And let's check our browser again.
Ah, it looks much nicer.
Although a motley crew they be,
don't they?
Okay, some of you may recognize
a few of those faces.
will have a quiz later.
OK?
So that'll be our student list page.
So we can move through this
application one by one,
picking off all the
different kinds of things.
So this is what we can do.
We can go in here and select
and fix the user interface
for courses and for students,
and we'll map down until those things
cross over until I look at students and
all the courses that they're taking.
So why don't we do that?
Okay, in this list page,
I've also got courses.
Okay.
So I can move courses over
here and I can inspect it.
OK?
I can do a too-many table,
and maybe what I want to list
is specifically the course name.
So let's save that.
take a look at what we have.
So it's collapsing the courses.
Let's clean that up.
Save again.
So now I have the students and I've
crossed a many to many relationship
and I can list the courses.
Still haven't done any coding yet.
Still I'm just configuring basically
the rules on how we're mapping
from models to applications.
So if I look at-- let's
sort these by last name.
By clicking on the icon, I can sort them.
Let's look at a course.
Basic Circuits Inspection looks
like it could use a little work,
so let's go back home
and clean up another one.
So let's look at courses.
We've cleaned up some
of the student pages.
Let's clean up some of the courses pages.
All right, so here's the courses.
Let's take-- it looks like in here,
Cost is free.
Obviously, this is a free university.
So let's take out some of these things.
We'll leave in name.
And let's leave in instructor name.
and save that and reload.
And that looks a little better.
OK.
Let's sort them like that.
And I can do the same thing here.
So I can list in this list page,
I can actually list all the students
that are in that page as well
and traverse the relationship.
So there's a relationship
called Students.
Again, I'm crossing the barriers
from one table to another.
To do this in another tool,
normally you'd be writing SQL joins
and joining tables and having
to deal with all this stuff.
Let's put it in a table
again and let's display their
last name and let's save it.
OK, there we go.
OK,
so now I can begin to loop a little bit.
I can look at individuals.
Let's clean up one more thing.
Let's clean up the
inspection for students,
and let's clean up the
inspection for courses.
So I don't like the fact
that it lists seven courses.
That looks kind of ugly.
So I'll go back to my web assistant.
Let's put take out enrolled.
Let's take last name and bubble it up.
First name, I'm bubbling this up.
Let's take photo.
And actually,
I want to move that out and traverse
the relationship for photo again.
So as I'm inspecting a student,
we'll display their photo both in the
list page and in the inspection page.
Okay.
Let's add that.
Make it an image.
And in the courses,
we're going to select the course name.
Let's save that.
Reload.
There we go.
One more thing.
I'm not a big fan of collapsing.
All right, so let's not allow collapsing.
There we go.
I'll clean it up one more time, OK?
All right,
so now we basically have an application
that I can take a student,
look at their courses,
go across to the courses.
I need to clean up the inspect
courses so that I can display
who's all in the course.
So let's synchronize that.
This is always one that is fun to
do because we can sometimes as this
application goes along we can go a
bit too quick and actually bind it up,
but let's give it a shot here.
Okay, so we'll keep courses and
we'll keep course instructor.
There we go.
Okay.
That looks too simple.
Let's go back and add students.
And let's put a table in there
that has a student's last name.
[Transcript missing]
So we'll go in here and
fix or change all three.
We'll change the login
panel a little bit,
we'll change the menu
wrapper a little bit,
and we'll change the header a little bit.
We'll show off some of the
things of WebObjects Builder.
WebObjects Builder is the way
that you edit HTML in WebObjects.
As Steve mentioned yesterday,
if you want to deal with the files that
WebObjects Builder normally deals with,
you can use anything.
But we think it's easiest
to use in WebObjects Builder
for a couple of reasons.
It edits your HTML,
but it uses a standard metaphor
that we have of objects,
an object browser on the bottom.
And what we're doing is we're
binding those objects to the HTML.
The only tag you'll see in the
HTML from us is the WebObjects tag.
So we really try and stay out of there,
and instead we try and dynamically
bind these objects with memory.
So we're doing that with
minimal impact on the HTML.
WebObjects Builder also
has built-in integration,
as you saw yesterday in
Steve Heyman's presentation.
WebObjects Builder is a web-based
software that allows you to integrate
entities from EOModeler into WebObjects
Builder and it will automatically
create a display group object for us
in order to connect up to the backend.
WebObjects Builder also has
integration with Project Builder.
So if I'm changing code
in WebObjects Builder,
it automatically and instantaneously
updates in Project Builder.
So let's take a look at that
and customize that a little bit.
Okay,
if we can go back to the demo machine.
So here are my web components.
You can see I have three,
as I said before.
Nobody stood up, good.
Click on those to launch
WebObjects Builder.
And let's go ahead and
bring up all three.
And then we can just move
Project Builder to the background.
Okay?
First, let's take a look at our
login page that we had,
our main page.
So remember we said WebObjects
Builder has the HTML part on the top
and the object part on the bottom.
I can browse objects.
You'll find the general design
pattern of browsing and browsing
objects to be a standard thing.
It's one of my favorite developers.
I'm from Boulder, Colorado.
It says it's all simply
a matter of browsing.
You can browse everything.
So he wrote a tool that browses
the Oracle schema and browses
the Objective-C runtime.
It's all just browsing, he says.
So that's all we're
doing here on the bottom.
We can look at application objects,
session objects.
Below the line are methods
or actions that I've got.
So my main.java has a
default page action,
which probably is bound
to the login panel.
Okay?
So I'm going to... clean
up the table a little bit.
As we've shown you a little bit before,
you can see the HTML along the bottom,
the depths of the
HTML path along the bottom.
So if I want to look at
this table row right here,
or if I want to look at
what is included in a form,
a WebObjects form,
I can look at that level.
So it's very handy.
It's also very handy when
you're tying methods to objects.
You can bind here or I can bind
as I drag from my... my object
to bind to the HTML either place.
Okay?
Very handy.
Sometimes if you have some complex HTML,
much easier to deal with in that fashion.
Okay?
All right.
Let's take a look at a table row here.
Let's get rid of the assistant part
because I'm not really going to have...
now that our app is looking pretty good,
we're probably going to not
need the assistant anymore.
Let's take and center that.
And let's look for an
image that we have laying,
just happen to have laying around.
All the education WebObjects.
Now when I drag an image or any other
kind of resource into my application,
it's going to ask me,
do you want to add this
as a global resource?
OK.
So yes I do.
It adds it as a global
resource to my project.
OK.
So I can save that.
I can also look at what this
page looks like in the raw HTML.
Notice what I had highlighted here.
Whatever I happen to
highlight here as I move over,
highlights here.
So WebObject name equals
Education WebObjects.
So it named that right there in the HTML.
And I can easily, again,
if I'm having trouble finding
something embedded in a table,
I can click on it here and switch
between views and actually see where
that is where it's highlighted.
I can also get somewhat of a view of
what it's going to look like as a best
guess in the rendering in the HTML.
There are palettes,
as Steve mentioned yesterday.
He has many more palettes than I do.
But you can drag and drop other
things off the palettes into here.
If I had this image on a palette already,
it would be something that I could
just drag into my project and bind up.
The dynamic things that WebObjects
includes are on the bottom row here.
So as you hold your mouse above those,
you can see all the kinds of things
that we can bind up to WebObjects.
Thank you.
And I can also add
other variables or keys,
and it does this in a very smart way.
So if I want to add a key such as,
let's call it a course, and it's a class,
this will list all the different
kind of classes I have access to.
But it's not just the
standard object types.
It also figures out and
substitutes in things like
courses that come from my EOModel.
So it understands how to connect
up to the database and include
these things in my application.
When I add that,
my course object now understands
what are the attributes that
it's pulling from our model.
[Transcript missing]
So we'll delete that.
So there's many powerful things
you can do with WebObjects Builder.
We'll keep that as our main page.
And let's go on to some of
the other reusable components
that are in our application.
So you'll notice on the page
there's a menu header and a...
This is the page wrapper.
It's an object that we use in WebObjects.
In order to get reuse on a
lot of our pages very quickly,
so I can wrap any page in this
page wrapper and it gets all
the settings in there for free,
when I drag the image in again, it says,
do you want to replace,
since I've already put
this in the resources,
I know that,
I've got something in there by that name,
do you want to replace it or
do you want to just use it?
Let's just use it.
Okay, so we'll include that
in our page wrapper,
we'll call that one good, save that.
Okay, now our last page is
the menu on the side.
It's a read-only application,
so we're not going to
insert anything new.
So again,
I can select anything that I have in
WebObjects Builder and simply delete it.
Okay?
We probably don't want
to customize anymore.
Notice I can see on the tagline that
that's what I'm trying to delete.
We can delete that as well.
Okay.
Let's save that.
And let's keep this one open so we can
show you how this can modify on the fly
or how we can do other kinds of things.
Okay?
So that's WebObjects Builder
in a very short time frame.
Let's launch our project again.
Rebuild and launch.
Let's take a look at what we have.
Okay.
So here's our new login panel.
We can clean this up however you want,
but this certainly looks better
than what I started with.
Foo, Bar, again in my super secret
Apple Connect login panel.
Okay, so now I can search.
There's one thing I'm
not wild about in here.
It says entities.
If you can see it in the upper left.
So entities doesn't probably
mean anything to most of
the teachers in my school.
So let's take a look
in WebObjects Builder.
I don't see it.
It's hard to see again in the HTML.
So this is one of those instances
where it's kind of nice to go into.
WebObjects Builder Raw Mode.
And I can search on entities.
And there it is.
And let's change this
to looking for-- OK.
So it's handy sometimes to have the
raw HTML there as well so I can search
for difficult things that are hidden.
And again,
do I have to recompile this app now?
No, because it's all dynamic on the fly.
And notice it's looking
for-- I can look for courses.
I can look for students.
Let's look for, again, courses.
There's my courses, basic circuits,
and I can traverse my relationships.
Okay?
Not a bad app for how many minutes?
About a half an hour at most.
If I wasn't talking so much,
I could probably do it in about five.
Okay?
Thanks.
Okay, so you can begin to see the power
of what we can do with these tools.
And yet we're building
these straightforward apps
without developing any code,
and we can do this very rapidly,
but yet not lose the power
of WebObjects underneath.
So we haven't taken away any of
the incredible power that a lot of
serious developers that have been
using this for a long time understand
is lying underneath the covers.
So what a great way to get started
with a tool that isn't going to
hit the ceiling as soon as we
walk away from this application.
Okay, so to talk a little bit more,
I've kind of abstracted away from
where this information all came from.
So in order to talk about that,
I'm going to bring out Dan Montana.
No, Joe Moreno to talk about EOModeler.
Thank you.
Afternoon,
I'm Joe Moreno with Apple Eye Services.
About two minutes to two this afternoon,
I was in the WebObjects lab.
Someone came up to me and said, hey Joe,
aren't you doing introduction
to WebObjects Tools?
And I said, why yes.
And they said, well,
that begins in two minutes.
So, obviously it was wrong,
but I about had a heart attack,
thinking I wasn't going to
make it over here on time.
For about the next 15 minutes,
or maybe even shorter
if I can squeeze it in,
I'm going to talk about EOModeler.
But I can't tell you what EOModeler
does unless you know what an EOModel is.
So, it's going to be more on EOModel,
what an EOModel is.
An EOModel provides persistent
data store connectivity.
It maps data into objects
and it defines relationships.
And these circles that you see,
these disks,
the red disks with the yellow circles,
those represent EOs.
if you've never seen that before.
All an EO is is a Java object in memory.
Absolutely no difference,
with the exception that an
EO connotates the data came from,
say, a row in a database table.
Each EOModel WebObjects app
connects to a specific data source.
So in your WebObjects application you
can have multiple data connections.
Now it does not have to
be a relational database.
It could be a flat file, it could be XML,
or it could be screen scraping.
But for the rest of my little talk here,
I'm just going to go on ace option,
we're talking to a
relational database system.
Also, an EOModel will map data at
runtime into particular data types.
Example here is a var char would
become a Java line string and
int would become a Java line num.
It doesn't have to happen like this,
but that's generally what makes sense.
This is the Connection
Dictionary Inspector,
which I will show you on my demo.
If you can see it in the back,
all it has is the Connection
Dictionary information.
We're using JDBC, OpenBase,
and then the URL where
you find the database.
There's usually, doesn't have to be,
but there is usually a one-to-one
mapping between a database table and
an EL or a Java class in your project.
And this is where you can
see the mapping provided.
A student entity or student database in
your database table maps to a student EL.
Very intuitive, makes sense.
Also again,
it provides the mapping between
columns and EO attributes.
also creates templates for you.
You will click a button and it
will generate a Java file for you
which will go into your project.
This is what the file looks like.
This isn't the whole file,
but the top part there shows
the setter and the getter
for last name and first name.
And then below that white line is where
you start implementing your custom logic.
For example, a very simple custom
method here is full name.
It's the one we always
use for some reason.
And all it does is return first
name plus a space plus last name.
Also in an EOModel,
you define relationships.
You define two-one relationships.
You can define too many relationships,
just like you do in a database.
One other thing that I think
is a big one with an EOModel is
you can define a many-to-many.
Now, even though your database
doesn't support the many-to-many,
you can, in memory,
following too many relationships and
It just works like magic
where the middle table,
which is in the database,
is sort of hidden so you
don't even have to pretend.
You can ignore it like
your appendix or something.
You can also define relationship rules,
like delete rules, cascade, deny,
nullify, no action.
Cascade, that's a big one.
Cascade,
you have a student object and it has,
let's say, a one-to-one to a photo.
Every student has one and only one photo.
When I delete the student,
it doesn't make sense to keep the
photo object in the database anymore.
That's how you get orphaned rows
in your child database tables.
So you can tell EOModeler
that when I delete a student,
generate the SQL also
to delete the photo.
You can do deny, nullify, no action.
Propagate primary key in a
one-to-one relationship again
between student and photo.
When I insert a new student,
it makes sense to already go
ahead and insert a row into the
photo table and then join them
across the same primary key.
So basically the primary
key is propagated.
And also owns destination,
this is a little more advanced,
but again,
an example of student to photo.
In memory, you can create, read, update,
delete your standard CRUD with EOs.
One thing you can do is you hook them up
into relationships and you unhook them.
When you unhook them,
if one owns the destination
and you don't re-hook it up,
it gets deleted from the database,
which may be what you want.
Here are some things that EOModelers,
the tools specifically, can do.
They can reverse engineer
database schemas into an EOModel,
which we've done quite a few times,
probably once a session so far.
Generate SQL to create
or sync database schema.
This is good if you don't know SQL.
Like, I don't know SQL too well,
so I just use EOModeler to cheat.
It can graphically create fetch specs.
In the next session,
they're going to talk about fetch specs.
All a fetch spec is is
a query on a database.
And you can do it programmatically
in your Java code.
Again, this doesn't mean you
have to put SQL in there,
but you can generate a fetch spec
programmatically in your code.
Or you can store it
graphically in your EOModel.
It allows importing
and exporting of data.
EOModeler can import from a
flat file into a database.
Or it can export.
Or it can export into a flat file.
These flat files we call
P lists or property lists.
And you can also browse live data.
EOModel is just the tip
of the iceberg though.
There's a whole layer of
middleware between your WebObjects
application and the database.
And this whole area of
middleware we call EOF,
Enterprise Objects Frameworks.
And basically your EOModel
works with EOF to keep EOs,
Java objects in memory,
synchronized with the
database and vice versa.
You make a change to a Java object
in memory that represents an EO,
when you say save changes,
that SQL is going to the database.
And here's an example of just
how simple it is to get data from
a database in your Java code.
The first line there is basically saying,
"Give me all the students with
the last name Smith." So you
get an array of objects back.
The next one is we're going
to take the first object,
object at the next zero,
and we're going to change
it from Smith to Jones.
And then the last line,
we're going to save changes.
Now that editing context is basically
just a bucket that your data goes into.
And it watches for changes
and then updates the database.
That you'll get some more exposure
to in the next session after this.
So this is the key.
An EOModel provides a
layer of abstraction that
minimizes the cost of change.
As we switch over to the demo,
I'm just going to comment
that we've all experienced
[Transcript missing]
So what we do here is open an
EOModel and reverse engineer it.
I'm going to open a database and
reverse engineer it into an EOModel
like you've seen so many times before.
Found the database and we're not going
to do anything with primary keys,
there are not going to
be any relationships.
This is going to be an EOModel of tables.
So these are the tables.
First thing is the connection dictionary.
This is what you saw
in the slide earlier.
This shows
You have the database and the
EOModel talks to the database.
This is the URL right here and
that's the database that it found.
And you can have your login and
password here and you can go
right in here and change it.
So now we're going to flip
over to the diagram view,
and we're all going to
focus on two entities,
the student and the photo that
we were talking about earlier.
There's a student, there's a photo.
We didn't tell it to assign primary keys.
I'm going to go in here,
assign Talent ID as a primary key,
and Talent ID.
This is what I really like.
I always forget where
the foreign key goes,
you know, well now I know it goes
on the too many side.
I used to forget and I joined
the relationships wrong
when I'd inspect them.
So now I just click here.
and then drag over to the other one now.
It won't let me connect to photo
because photo is a different
data type than talent ID.
But it will let me connect to talent ID.
It brings up this inspector,
which I'm going to minimize,
close for now.
And you see it's actually
joined the two tables.
And there's actual
real data behind these.
You can browse them.
And if there was real
data... There we go.
Yeah, there's real data behind them.
So the next thing you
do is save your EOModel.
It's going to give me a warning, I know,
because I haven't gone through
and made it all copacetic.
But I'll just save it in my home
directory with a unique intuitive name.
Now I'm going to generate a Java class.
Alright,
so I'm highlighting the student entity.
I'm just going to turn this off,
which we'll explain in a
later session what I just did.
And we won't click on the Java here.
I didn't give it a name,
so it's going to assume
to use student.java.
Makes sense.
And it generated a student.
[Transcript missing]
Put setters and getters for the
first name and the last name.
Now one thing you'll notice is that's
the only line of code that actually goes
to the database and pulls out the data.
There is no SQL in there.
And then again down here you would
just start putting in your custom
business logic such as full name.
And the last thing,
I mentioned I don't know SQL.
So if I was generating this
schema in EOModeler and there
was no database under it,
I could very simply come here and
Just click on the SQL panel here.
Let me turn everything off to show
you explicitly what it's doing.
It will create the tables that you want.
There's a SQL,
and this depends on what type
of database you're connected to.
It'll give you primary key constraints,
primary key support, etc.
And this depends on, again,
which database you're talking to.
And it will generate the
whole schema for you.
That concludes my portion of the talk.
I'm going to turn it back over to
Barry to talk about Direct to Web.
Thank you.
Thanks, Joe.
Good job.
Okay,
we have just enough time to talk about
Direct to Java Client a little bit.
Direct to Java Client is
similar to Direct to Web,
but it has a swing UI interface.
Okay, so it's not using the browser.
It's a pure Java application.
It gives you a little bit
of a richer experience than
the limitations of the web.
Again, it's very rapid development
for these kinds of apps.
And the thing to remember about
this is that it's probably easiest
[Transcript missing]
Let's build a new project.
Okay.
And it's going to be a
Direct to Java Client.
Application, we'll call it My School 2.
I'm going to add one additional
framework here that just simply sets up
Some parameters for me.
It's called the Java Client Class Loader.
So it'll allow me to run
this app much quicker.
Let's pick the model.
Again, the model is...
So we use the same model
that we were using before,
except now we're going
to display it in Swing.
So we can build and
launch this application.
One of the things that
was set up there for me,
normally this would go ahead
and launch it in the browser.
I'm actually going to launch
a Java client launcher.
So it's going to launch
this in a pure Java form.
It can also vend this through
the browser so that if you do
have to suck down swing classes,
it can actually do that for you.
But in this case...
We're not going to launch a browser.
So let's go ahead and connect up to
our running application right now.
And we'll show you in a
bit what that looks like.
So it's the same logic,
the same model that was
in my application before.
And let's get rid of some other things.
And here it is.
So it's the same kind
of thing we were doing,
but now it's available to me in swing.
So any platform that would
have Java on it can run this.
Let's look for last names again,
just to show you that we
are live and connected up.
Here's my last names.
And let's look for a
similar kind of name.
One of the things this allows me to
do is bring up other kinds of windows.
So I don't need to stay
within frames or the windows.
I can have multiple windows.
I can click on other
people in my application.
And I can have multiple
windows open at the same time.
Same thing that we had before,
I've got the tools.
But now instead of a Java applet,
this is what the assistant looks like.
So I can customize this.
If I want to get rid of facility
and I want to get rid of instructor,
I can apply that and restart.
Okay,
so now you can see I've restarted and
I've got rid of two of the tabs and
now I have the exact same application
running in a pure swing UI environment.
Okay, that's it.
If we can go back to the slides.
Okay, so if you're interested in
checking out these tools,
we would encourage you to
come to the WebObjects labs.
Here's the times, here's the hours.
It's a great lab.
It's much cleaner and doesn't make your
hands stink as much as a cadaver lab,
so it's a lot of fun.
The roadmap, as I mentioned before,
I mentioned a lot more of the courses.
These are some of the highlights.
Stick around for Introduction to EOF.
It should be very interesting.
And these are some of the other
ones that are the rest of the week.
Okay, people to contact at Apple, again,
Tony Triovion and Bob,
our new product manager,
who I believe has misspelled his
last name on the slides here.